+++
title = "Waltzing with Python's Walrus Operator"
date = 2023-08-13
description = "Uses for Python's assignment expression operator."

[taxonomies]
tags = ["python"]

[extra]
katex = true
+++

[Python 3.8](https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.8.html#assignment-expressions) introduced
a new assignment operator with [PEP 572](https://peps.python.org/pep-0572/) called **assignment expressions**,
a.k.a the **walrus operator**.  The walrus operator uses the new walrus-like syntax `:=`, to assign variables within an
expression.

It's been out for a few years at this point (at the time of writing Python 3.12 is around the corner) and
I've found some joy in how it's helped elegantly shorten some parts of my code.  Here are the ways I've
made use of the walrus operator.

<br>

## Error Handling
The walrus operator can help reduce repetition and make error handling a bit more streamlined.  In the
following snippet, `func()` will return `None` to represent an error occurred.

```python
x = func()
if not x:
    print("Error message")
    return
```

Using the walrus operator, the call to `func()` can be inlined.
```python
if not x := func():
    print("Error message")
    return
```

Shaving off a single line may seem trivial but those saved lines can add up.  For example, when parsing
user inputs and performing validation.  In the following snippet, we want to validate user inputs `x`, `y`,
and `z`.  If there's a validation problem, `validate` will return a string  with a message explaining what
is wrong with the input and a message of how to fix.  These messages get appended to a list so all validation
messages can be printed out together.

```python
validation_errors = []
if msg := validate(x):
    validation_errors += msg

if msg := validate(y):
    validation_errors += msg

if msg := validate(z):
    validation_errors += msg

if validation_errors: # a non-empty list resolves to True
    for error in validation_errors:
        print(error)
    return
```

<br>

## Comprehensions
Let's say we wanted to create a list of results from expensive function call but only results that aren't `None`.
With a list comprehension, the expensive function would need to be called twice.  Not ideal.
```python
y = [
    expensive_function(i) if expensive_function(i) for i in range(0, 10)
]
```

Of course, you could use normal for loop syntax but it's a fair bit more verbose, and for illustrative
purposes, we're allergic to verbose.
```python
y = []
for a in range(0, 10):
    x = expensive_function(i)
    if x == 0:
        y.append(x)
```

The walrus operator plops to the rescue here and allows us to use a list comprehension.
```python
y = [
    x if (x := expensive_function(i)) for i in range(0, 10)
]
```

This also applies to dictionary comprehensions.
```python
y = {
    i: x if (x := expensive_function(i)) for i in range(0, 10)
}
```

<br>

## Do While Loops

A do-while loop was proposed for Python in [PEP 315](https://peps.python.org/pep-0315/) but was
rejected for not providing a material improvement over the following:

```python
while True:
    x = f(a, b) # setup code
    if not x:   # condition
        break
    # loop body using x
```

A shortened version of do-while loop can be accomplished by having setup code execute once before the loop
and moving the condition into a while loop.  However, this is error-prone; `x = f(a, b)`
is duplicated for both the setup code and the loop body, and if it needs changing there are now multiple
places that must be updated.
```python
x = f(a, b) # setup code
while x:    # condition
    x = f(a, b)
    # loop body using x
```

With the walrus operator, it can all be inlined to the while condition.
```python
while x := f(a, b): # setup code and condition
    # loop body using x
```

<br>

## Pattern Matching
The walrus operator can also be useful in Pattern Matching.  Structural Pattern Matching
was introduced in Python 3.10 with [PEP 622](https://peps.python.org/pep-0622/).  If you're not yet
familiar see [PEP 363](https://peps.python.org/pep-0636/) for a tutorial.  The walrus can be useful
to inline a function call and store the return value in a variable for use in the cases.

```python
match x := f(a, b):
    case 0:
        # do stuff with x
    case 1:
        # do more stuff with x
    case 2:
        # even more doing with x
```

<br>

## An Over-the-Top Overuse Example
While the walrus operator is handy for shaving off a few lines of code, inlining too much can make
code difficult to reason about.  Use it sparingly, especially with other code-golfing operators.
For example, with the ternary operator.

```python
height = get_height(name) if (name := get_name(user_id)) else None
```

I think this can be okay but I also think it's clearer written long-form.
```python
if name := get_name(user_id):
    height = get_height(name)
else:
    height = None
```

And remember, just because you can doesn't mean you should write code like below, if you can avoid
it.  The example is modified from my own code.  I've slapped a dictionary comprehension, a ternary
operator, and a walrus operator into the same expression.  There's a lot going on here, but it's
formatted over multiple lines to help delineate what's happening.  Here, `params` holds the contents
of a configuration `.toml` that I needed to parse some weights from and convert into an `{enum: weight}`
dictionary.

```python
params: Dict[str, Dict[str, float]]

sampler_weights = (
    {
        ModeEnum(mode): weight
        for mode, weight in normalize_weights(weights).items()
    }
    if (weights := params.get("sampler", {}).get("weights"))
    else {"x": 0.5, "y": 0.5}
)
```
